Hi, my name is Steve Kinney, and
I am the head of front and engineering and
developer tools at
a company called Temporal.
And Vite is one of those technologies
that I've been using now for
two and a half years every day
across all of our projects.
So the good news is that I've got
a lot of experience using it.
The bad news is that for two years and
five months of that two and a half years,
I definitely thought it was pronounced
Vite, and so I have rapidly,
and internal conversations with my team,
called it Vite.
So I have been practicing calling
it Vite the entire time, and
we're gonna see if I slip up at all, and
I don't think I will, I think I got this.
It started out very simple,
I'd love to tell you it was
a conscientious choice of
evaluating every build tool.
For me personally, I don't like
fighting with my build tools, and
a large portion of my career has
been fighting with my build tools.
And when we started building
the new version of our UI for
open source product at Temporal,
we choose to use SvelteKit,
which was pretty 1.0 at the time,
which was a choice,
but it by default is built on top of Vite,
right?
And it was one of those pleasant surprises
to recalibrate one's brain to find out
that, wow, this is actually pretty great
and everything that I wanna do for
every weird use case that I have.
Well, as we go through stuff,
I'll talk about what some of those are.
But working on an open source
product that also has a cloud piece,
has a bunch of weird requirements that I
was dreading when some of the requirements
came down the line.
And solving almost all them
in Vite was shockingly easy,
sometimes in under half an hour or
an hour once comfortable with it.
So what we're gonna do is we'll talk
a little bit about what Vite is,
why it's pretty amazing.
And then enough that you will know how
to do almost anything, from the very
basics to the weird things that are unique
to whatever place you work at or will
work at the future, and how to kind of
bend it to your will in our time together.
So let's talk about,
let's just clarify what exactly Vite is,
cuz it's actually a little more
nuanced than we would think.
It calls itself the next generation
of frontend tooling, which is a good
marketing line, and, actually,
when we dig in a little bit, true, right?
And we'll talk about what that means.
I think the unofficial subtitle of this
course is all the things that shouldn't be
hard but are,
maybe they don't have to be, right?
And if you've ever spent a portion of your
time fighting with a certain built tool
that won't go named, then you
kinda know what I'm talking about.
And it's kind of refreshing to find out
that it's both easy, but a lot of times
things are easy, you're like, well, that
just means it doesn't do a lot, right?
And what I think is pretty
incredible is both easy and
simple to kind of do the basics,
cuz I don't wanna spend,
that fear in your heart when you
go to start a new project, and
then you remember how much boilerplate
you're going to have to do to get started.
A lot of times I'm like,
I don't have time for that, right?
And with Vite, you'll actually see in
the very beginning how quickly we can get
something up and running.
And then by the end,
you'll see how far we can take it
all the way to production use cases.
And like I said before, all of our apps,
large enough apps usually exist in some
kind of ecosystem of a company that's
got all sorts of little
nuances that are special.
And we'll kinda talk about how
it's extensible as well, and
we'll kinda go through that
when we do the overall outline.
So I could make a bunch of slides,
but I think the Vite homepage and
those little six boxes along
the bottom there kinda do a pretty
good job at giving you
the initial value prop, right?
This idea of a very fast instant server
start, and we'll talk about how that
works and why it works, but
Vite is I believe French for fast.
So it better be fast, otherwise it's
immediately lying out the gate, and
luckily it is.
And that kind of next generation build on
modern web technologies allows it to do
a lot of these things like the hot module
reloading that is way faster than some of
the other previous build tools.
At the same time, it is built on top
of a lot of prior art, literally,
which means you get a pretty
robust ecosystem of plugins.
So that we'll look at how to extend it,
we'll look at how to do custom stuff.
We'll look at how to do stuff that I've
had to do kind of just in some of my
unique situations.
But the nice part is,
is that there's also a very, very,
very robust ecosystem of plugins so
that maybe you just don't have to.
Generally speaking, a good Google search
will probably find that somebody has
already encountered that problem and
solved for it as well.
And so I kinda think about this,
our time together in four acts.
Act one is Vite is simple, right?
We will see how quickly and easy it is
to get up and running with it, right?
And how fast it is to start iterating on
whatever idea that you have, so on and so
forth.
At the same time,
we're gonna see that Vite is powerful.
And what I mean by that is there's
a lot of best practices in our
industry that a lot of times we
don't do cuz they're hard, right?
And that getting that infrastructure
in place is a full-time job.
And it doesn't have to be
cuz a lot of those things,
the tooling exists already in Vite, and
we just gotta figure out where it's
hiding from us and how to use it.
And then the next part is that
Vite is super flexible, right?
And the weird bespoke situations for
us, that we can totally solve.
And there are a lot of plugins that exist,
and when there isn't,
Vite is super extensible,.
It's using Under the Hood for
a lot of the build pieces,
Roll Up, which has been around for
a very long time and
has a very powerful plugin system
with a lot of prior art around it.
So you can basically bend it
to do whatever you need to do.
Kind of more specifically across
those four acts we're gonna look
at getting up and running, and
just kinda getting started and
understanding how to first fire up
a Vite app and what's involved in that.
The act of building it,
the fun of bringing in CSS, and
the various ways that you can do that.
We'll be mostly writing JavaScript today,
but
I would be remiss If I didn't
at least recognize that,
in my day-to-day life, in a lot of
engineers, TypeScript is kind of,
in a lot of ways, the lingua franca for
a lot of these things.
As well as you will probably have one
of any number of front-end frameworks.
And so we'll look at how to integrate
all of those and get up and
running super easily with that as well.
We're not gonna be focusing on building
anything with those frameworks, but
we'll kind of say, here's how to bring in,
whether it's React, or Svelte, or Vue, or
what have you, bringing in any of those
frameworks and working with them.
Then optimizing static assets,
all the other images and
stuff that we may work
with in our applications.
Then we'll look at building libraries for
either the browser or for node,
it doesn't really matter,
the technique is basically the same.
That could be anything from a set of
utilities, to maybe you're seeking
to actually just build a library, or
stuff for building a design system.
Maybe you share components across
the organization, you wanna have a library
that you can consume, or serve up
to the other applications as well.
We'll look at some things that
are somewhat popular in some of the other
build tools that kinda, as I was talking
to a lot of people preparing for this,
they were like, well,
I need to have module federation.
And so
we'll talk about both what that is and
as well as how to implement it using Vite.
And then we'll look at some basic
examples of how you can then extend Vite,
once we got that foundation,
to do whatever you want, right?
Whether that's kind of just integrate
with into your ecosystem, or
maybe you work with a certain file format
that you want to be able to parse and
use within your application.
It's not like,
Vite doesn't support that, well.
It's actually no,
you can easily add all of that.
And so we'll kind of look at all those
things during our time together, and
we'll kind of take a tour of those things.
So Vite is kind of interesting because I
would say that it effectively stands on
the shoulders of giants, right?
A lot of times when we think about
all of these tools, we're like,
well, I could use this tool, but
that's good in development cases, but
then I need a different tool for
when I build for production.
The really great part about Vite
is that it is built on a bunch
of other tools, right?
And so you don't necessarily have to make
those decisions cuz Vite has already done
the work of wiring up a bunch of other
different battle-tested solutions and
kind of made a suite of them that kind of
uses certain tools where they're currently
the best, and then other tools where
they might also be the best as well.
So one of the tools is esbuild, and this
is, again, a shot from the website here.
The important part here is that top line,
right?
esbuild is a AST parser written in Go,
I think it's hilarious
that when I started,
almost all of the front end
build tools like SASS or
whatever were built in Ruby, and then
we rewrote them all in JavaScript, and
now we're rewriting them all in Go and
Rust, cuz they're that much faster.
But I think the chart speaks for
itself on esbuild now.
esbuild is used mostly in development,
for the development server.
And the nice part is,
is that Vite uses esbuild to
serve native ECMAScript modules.
And ECMAScript modules are pretty cool
because that's kind of like the syntax
you've used before, like import whatever
from, that syntax, is actually somewhat,
with the browsers we're all using,
supported in the browser, right?
As you go back to legacy browsers,
not so much, but for
most of the browsers that we're using
when we develop our applications,
we have native supports for these modules.
And what's really cool about that is,
if you've used something like Webpack,
an older version of Webpack or
whatever, we don't have those.
So what Webpack does is it bundles it and
then serves it up in a script tag, right?
And that means every time you make
a change, we've gotta re-bundle the entire
application, figure out what changed
through the hot module replacement.
And doing stuff takes longer
than not doing stuff.
So when you're not bundling, and you're
just letting the browser actually fetch
a bunch of different modules locally and
just swapping out just that module and
not having to do any bundling in
node to serve it up for yourself,
turns out that that's very,
very, very fast.
And there are some other tools,
like you can opt in if you're
using something like React or
something along those lines to some other
tool called the Speedy Web Compiler.
This one's written in Rust, right?
Again, incredibly fast for kind of parsing
all your JSX and stuff along those lines.
Even though ES modules are supported
in most of the evergreen
browsers at this point, at the moment,
Vite still uses Rollup,
which we'll take a look at in a second,
for the bundling.
Because there's still optimizations
one can do to bundle assets
that are going to be shipped at
the same time always into one bundle.
And so when we're in development, we don't
really care about how many HTTP requests
we're making cuz we're
talking to localhost, right?
But there are still,
I think in this day and age,
cases where doing some of the bundling
that we've seen from Rollup, from webpack,
from a lot of these other things,
is, in the year of 2023, 2024, still
probably the fastest and most efficient
way to serve production assets, right?
You get the tree shaking, you get all
the stuff you can do at compile time,
that give you a super
fast production build.
And I think, very candidly, the Vite team
has said, if that reality changes and
using esbuild and just native ES modules
turns out a year, two years, three
years from now to be kind of the path
forward, they're open to switching to it.
But right now, using Rollup is, I think,
one of the better ways to build for
production.
And the nice part is that Rollup having,
I don't know exactly how old Rollup is,
but I know that I have been using it for
since 2017, 2018, so that old at least.
And that means that the ecosystem
around the plugins,
the fact that there's probably something
already built off the shelf that
you can just use is incredibly
convenient as well.
And it does a lot for
you behind the scenes.
I also had a logo for post CSS up
there in the very beginning, right?
And so out of the box, you're getting CSS
pre-processing and transpilation, right?
You don't have to opt into any of it, but
you will be able to add
stuff through post CSS.
You get the code splitting,
it will go ahead and try to parallelize.
If you are dynamically requesting one
module and that immediately is gonna
request another one, at build time
using Rollup it'll figure that out and
it'll just bundle all together,
makes things as fast as possible.
These are things that exist that
you don't even have to know
what I'm talking about right
now because it doesn't matter.
It happens, don't think about it,
don't worry about it,
just understand that it's fast.
We are, for the most part, there'll be
a little bit of React towards the end,
and there's no real expectation
that you know React.
But it's just to kind of show what
it's like to pull in a framework, and
that seemed like the easiest
kind of obvious choice.
But Vite integrates with lots of different
frameworks, and when we even show
how to pull in one of them, you'll see how
easy it is to pull in any of them, right?
I use Svelte in my day to day, but
also React a lot because that's
the world that I live in.
These are some of the ones that
are officially supported with official
plugins, but I'll show you where
the community ones are for
almost anything you could ever want.
And in a lot of cases,
you're like Vite sounds a lot like Vue,
that's because it's got the same creator.
So it is the default build tool for
all Vue apps.
It is the default build tool for
all Svelte apps, SvelteKit rather,
which is kind of next, but for
Svelte, but by the Svelte team.
And so it is actually
the foundational build tool for
at least two of these, but
works great with all of them as well.
And it's got a lot of features.
We're not gonna kinda go too much
into these, cuz generally speaking,
if you are using some kind of framework,
these are done for you.
These are kind of those things that
are there mostly for library authors,
but there is kind of built in support for
hot module reloading, for
server-side rendering,
and all those things.
I've got sections written on that, we can
kind of explore if we're interested, but
for the most part, they are ones that,
unless you are writing your own framework,
there's probably something you're using
that's kind of got that built in.
If you're using any of the kind of
official plugins and templates,
you will get all of this for free and you
will never think about it and you will be
happy, and life will go on and you'll
go back to building your application.